The committee was very interested in progress on this particular issue.
We had a briefing quite some time ago
and
understood that there were some
difficulties, but because of Ministry of Health and
MPI cross involvement
there. If you could
fire away and tell us where we're at, and I'm sure there'll be plenty of questions.
I can. I should first preface by saying I
prepared some notes that start a bit earlier than that, but I saw your interim
report, and you
obviously know quite a lot about it already.
If I start a reasonable way through the-
Yep
... story,
I may not have too much to say, but-
It's all right.
We may be finished quite quickly. But
just very briefly, as I'm sure you all know, hemp
is a form of cannabis that's got very low THC,
and
THC is the main psychoactive
substance. And so
it's
wholly unsuitable as a recreational drug.
But it is nevertheless regulated under the misuse of drugs
legislation, which is why we ended up with
this
review topic. A
year ago when, I think Tim came and talked to you, the
situation was that we had
reasonably comprehensive regulation around a licensing
regime that involved record keeping and monitoring and
reporting obligations and so on. And
when we were briefed about this, our take on it was that
that was a little bit over the top for the risk involved,
which is why we got interested in it as a ministry.
I should say, just very briefly, I'm not sure how across
members are of
the functions of the Ministry of Regulation.
We've got quite a broad range of functions.
But
one of the areas that we work on is reviews of current
legislation.
And that kind of comes in two flavors.
One flavor is that we do
what we call sector reviews, which are mid-sized reviews of
systems of regulation, like the
regulation around the importation of agricultural and horticultural
products, for example, or solar
panel installation regulation and so on.
And then there's a much smaller limb which is
quite reactive, where we
get tips from the public or from other sources, and we look
at much smaller areas of regulation, and this was in that latter
category. So we'd had intel that
this industry was possibly out regulated, and that's how I got interested in
it.
And we got interested because it looked as if
the industry was underperforming compared to what you might expect.
There were projections for it to grow quite significantly.
Some projections were around the tens of millions of dollars.
Some were around
much higher than that, although they were possibly a bit optimistic.
And the industry was sitting in the very low millions of
dollars of revenue. And so it looked like something was holding it back.
And it was possible that it was this regime.
And the regime, we felt, was possibly holding it back in a few ways.
First of all,
although the compliance costs weren't particularly high, they were still a factor.
Secondly,
the need to get a license delays how quickly you can shift
crops and
we had heard anecdotally that there was potential
for a crop failure and for that crop to be quickly
replaced with a hemp crop because it grows quite quickly.
But the time that it took to get a license was standing in the way of that, and
so land would often
stand unused in that situation instead of being used for
hemp. So that was a second thing.
Thirdly, we had heard that
the restriction on the types of cultivars that could be used was
potentially affecting the
competitiveness of the industry.
And
then there was another set of
issues that I'll come to later that unfortunately we couldn't get into.
But I'll come to those a bit later.
So we got interested in it because it looked like there could be a regulatory
solution here, and that's kind of our bread and butter, to try and find things that
are being held up by regulation that we might be able to,
at very low risk, improve.
You commented on the fact that we'd had a bit of trouble with, or there'd been a
bit of trouble with the Ministry of Health and Ministry of
Primary Industries.
That actually wasn't really our experience.
The Ministry of Health was very supportive of the review, because
there were
compliance costs at their end factoring to administer the regime, which they didn't
think was worthwhile.
And so they were pretty supportive the whole way through
and provided a lot of the technical expertise that we didn't have
in-house around the issues.
MPI did have some concerns, but
the scope of the review was narrowed so that
those concerns weren't-Weren't very much triggered,
and
so they also ended up not being detractors.
So our relationship with both those agencies during the review was actually pretty
good, and they were pretty supportive, certainly in terms of giving technical
expertise where we needed it.
Just to move to the concerns that MPI did have.
So their most major concern was around
the use of hemp in animal feed,
and we didn't include that in the scope of the review,
and that is not being changed.
It is under, as I understand it, constant ongoing
discussion between the industry and MPI to see whether there's some
kind of solution. Because it would be fantastic for the industry if they could
use hemp for animal feed because it would take something
that they have to dispose of at quite a lot of cost and turn it into something
they could sell instead.
But there are real sensitivities in some of our export
markets about any hemp ending up in the
food chain. And so,
the
conclusion is that we would put really big
export industries at risk if we went down that track.
And MPI was very nervous about that, and with
pretty good reason, I think. And I've been on calls between
them and the industry where the industry does appear to
accept that that is a pretty major risk that has to
be carefully navigated.
So that put a review of the ACVM
legislation out of scope of our review.
It did remain a small concern for MPI because they were worried that,
if there was a proliferation of people growing
hemp, that some people might just feed it to animals anyway.
And the way that we dealt with that was that anybody who
wants to grow industrial hemp,
going forward, I'm probably getting a little bit ahead of myself because I'll talk
about where the review got to, but just to finish the point, going forward,
will have to notify MPI before they plant, which will give MPI
the opportunity to reach out to them and stress the
importance of
the hemp not getting close to animals that
might end up in the export food chain.
Oh, sorry, did you have a question?
But that notification is not the same as them requiring to get a license directly
from MPI. Just a notification. Just a notification. Okay. That's right.
Yep.
So where we got to on our recommendations in the end was that we
recommended that the license regime be removed
entirely really.
So that got rid of the record-keeping
obligations and reporting obligations and so on,
and meant that the people could be more nimble.
There are a few restrictions that remain in place.
So you still need a license to import or export.
There are restrictions on what you can do with the plant.
So this is really the deregulation's really around the
stalks,
and the seeds.
So if people want to use the leaves
and flowers, they really need to sell them into a
licensed medicinal cannabis scheme.
Because that's where the cannabinoids are.
There was an old restriction under the
old regime,
separate from the license, which said that industrial hemp growers could
only sell a limited number of plants and seeds to
medicinal cannabis schemes. We saw
no reason for that, so we removed that as well.
So they at least can sell unlimited amounts into those medicinal cannabis
schemes after the change.
There is also still the restriction that I talked about around
animal feed.
And we introduced a new requirement, which was to
replace the licensing, which was that before anybody planted,
they needed to notify both the police and MPI.
The MPI bit was so that MPI could do its outreach.
The police bit was because there was a concern that
criminal interests might see this as an opportunity to
piggyback on a growing industry and potentially use it as a
money-laundering operation that could also
disguise an illicit cannabis growing operation.
That was kind of the concern. And so the requirement to
notify police before you plant was intended as a deterrent for that
largely.
And if that did start happening as a source of intel for the police.
So that was a slightly new thing. There was
previously a notification requirement, but it was a bit loose
because it was after planting,
and within a kind of reasonable period of time.
Whereas we replaced that with the requirement that the notification had
to be before planting and annually updated,
so that
if police found any plants on any property and there wasn't
a notification in place that was less than a year old, then they
could deem that to be illicit cannabis.
So that was kind of our bright-line way of trying
to deter
the criminal elements from getting involved.
The recommendations of the review were accepted,
umComplete by
Cabinet and the
new secondary legislation to bring it into effect has been
promulgated, but we're within the 28 days before it becomes
effective. So the new regime is not yet effective but will be
very soon.
So that's really all I have by way of update.
And I probably can't string it out too much more.
Does anybody on the committee have any questions?
So it can be affected by an order in council without any
legislative change. But what about the Misuse of Drugs Act stuff?
So the
Misuse of Drugs Acts contemplates that you can
permit certain uses of the cannabis plant through regulations,
and so this can all be done through regulations.
Mm.
And so the regulations are permissive of
industrial hemp being grown,
distributed, sold, basically used in any way apart from the
restrictions that I talked about before, which largely relate to the
flowers and leaves-
Mm
... and use for animal feed, which is in a different set of
legislation.
So I'm still not clear about the Misuse of Drugs Act bit of it.
So the Misuse of Drugs Act,
prevents you from doing a whole lot of things with cannabis because it's a
class C drug.
Mm.
But it allows regulations to be passed-
Right. Okay
... that allow you to do things.
Right.
And the regulations allow this. So we already had regula-
since 2006, we've had regulations that have allowed some use of
industrial hemp.
Right.
It's just that they came with a whole lot of conditions attached, and we were kind
of stripping away those conditions.
And one final one.
Okay.
How does the industry feel about it?
The industry.
So in the early consultation, the industry was a little bit
split about it.
But we ended up
mainly talking to a few representatives who have become very positive about
it over time. The
industry's view on it is a little bit split depending on the type of business they
have. So exporters
saw some benefit in a licensing regime
because it gave a
government stamp of approval to the product that they were exporting, and
so that they had some kind of attachment to it.
But we didn't really hear that loudly all the way through.
So even the people who had that interest kind of said, "Oh, no, we do support the
changes," but
they kind of mulled over whether there might be anything they could do to keep
something
like that. In the end, we convinced them that the
import-export licensing requirements that stayed in place, and
they have to stay in place because of our international obligations-
Oh
... were going to be sufficient to give that stamp of
approval.
Mm-hmm.
And
our take on it was that people got pretty confident about that.
The second concern from the industry,
is around cross-pollination risk.
So if there was a proliferation of low-quality
hemp being planted, there is a risk that that could
affect the quality of their crops.
And that is a bit of an ongoing concern for the industry.
It's a concern across all of horticulture.
Mm.
And it's generally managed by the industry, and there are
kind of
systems that they do to manage where they each plant.
And the industry's working on
moving into those systems.
And MPI is supporting that to some degree.
I think the industry would
like a little bit more, but our take on it from the outside
is that it's kind of a reasonable balance at the moment.
Mm. Would it-
MPI's got a lot to worry about, a lot of other things.
Mm-hmm. Just as a suck on that, it would fall in within the current seed
certification
sort of
parameters anyway, wouldn't it?
So the seed certification is
gone, so you'll be able to plant-
No, I mean the general seed certification, not just for-
Oh, you mean the food part?
No, there's the seed certification where you have
seed that's
grown and harvested and processed for
either
pasture use or
use to be or for export or whatever it
is. MPI have a seed certification scheme
that
does look at those things.
Yes.
Purity and germination and
the
cultivars and things like that.
So my understanding is that it's kind of a system thing with a
facilitator being set up, but they're
not that hands-on about it. I think it is an industry-funded and
run thing across horticulture.
Right.
That's my understanding.
So they pointed the industry to people who are already doing
that for other horticultural industries to try and help
out and connect them up with
people who might be able to help them
along those sorts of lines.
That's right.
Yeah.
Ingrid.
Yeah. I've got some growers in my electorate who have been pushing
for this.
Oh, okay.
And I'm curious to know, my understanding it's to do with
competitiveness with Australia.
Have you seen modeling or have they given you numbers of what the difference would
make now with the economic impact, say a year hence or
three or five years hence?
So we haven't seen numbers.
There is some analysis that was done about how the industry could grow
in New Zealand. It's because it's much bigger in
Australia.I have the numbers here
somewhere, but I don't know how credible they are.
It was pretty hard to get into it because
it
seemed-
Can I-
... quite advocacy driven.
Sure.
But the-
We did get a series of numbers-
Right
... a year or so ago from hemp industry
themselves. They gave us quite
a bit of analysis.
Okay.
I think the, so the MPI analysis suggested it could
grow in New Zealand to about 30 million by 2030.
And at the moment it's sitting around about a million, I understand.
Yeah.
So it's got very low.
But there were other projections that we saw that suggested
it could grow as large as a billion dollars by 2030.
That didn't seem credible to us.
And-
The economic blip we did really just took those types of
projections from MPI at face value.
We didn't do our own modeling or anything like that.
There were also claims that this was an existential question for
parts of the sector. Is that an overstatement or is that your understanding that
without this regulatory change, that some of the
businesses would've had to-
I would say-
... live on online clients
... I would say that's credible because-
Right
... the industry certainly was really floundering in terms of numbers. Yeah.
Cool.
Yeah.
I don't think
this is the-
And I see-
... the golden bullet.
Yeah, sure.
But I think that they've got other challenges.
But this gives them a better chance than they had, I think.
Mm-hmm.
Mark.
Mr. Chair, thank you so much.
My question sort of goes back to what was forementioned,
in terms of
the industry itself obviously took issue with the
Misuse of Drugs Act and how it was policed.
Do you think where we are today and where the industry's
ultimately wanting to go, that it's still
too prohibitive in terms of police notification,
growing crops,
and the timelines that are afforded to do
that, that it is still under this ridiculous burden
of
THC levels being
at a certain threshold, yes or no, and therefore they can
grow it, yes or no. Do you think the industry and the
overall regulations are fit for purpose, or do they need further
fine-tuning?
I think that they-- So I don't think there's a big burden
at all with the notification. The notification is very easy.
It's just an email that somebody sends.
So there's no real burden there. I
think the industry, both the hemp industry and probably
more the medicinal cannabis industry,
suffers from
the perception that it's all part of a kind of illicit drug
family.
And
my understanding is that there are certainly
elements of the police that have that attitude as well.
But we heard no evidence of any kind of heavy-handed treatment of the
industry or anything like that. It was more
almost a branding issue for them. So at one point, I got told
off for calling it marijuana, which is
apparently
something that really does make it sound like it's illicit.
So there are certainly sensitivities, but I don't think they're a
regulatory problem.
I think that the main regulatory barrier is
really the, well, there are some
regulatory barriers in the medicinal cannabis area-
Mm
... which I think could be looked at, and in fact, the Ministry of Health are
looking at those.
But in hemp, the main regulatory barrier is, I think, the
animal feed regulatory barrier. But it's not
an overreach.
I'd like to think there was some way that it could be
modified in some way to give them some relief.
But there's certainly a legitimate concern there.
It's not, in my view, a regulatory overreach.
So supplementary on that, if I may, Mr. Chair.
Yeah.
So I think we all agree that the animal feed thing,
very, very nuanced, and if we appreciate that foreign markets
set the threshold for this stuff, then you're
sort of dancing on the head of a pin to try and get it across the line there.
My concern was always
when we started this whole process, that the industry
wanted to grow and the Misuse of Drugs Act was prohibitive.
You're saying that it's pretty much not, and it's more a
perception thing. Correct?
That's right. I think it was, but it's not-- Well, it wasn't prohibitive, but I
think it was a difficulty. But I think this reform has removed
that barrier pretty substantially.
Thank you so much.
Right. Are there any other further questions?
Excellent.
Thank you very much, Adam.
That's all right.
Good to get an update so we know where we are.
And
hopefully the industry
can grow a bit. I guess
we'll know over the next few years if there are any other
issues that they might rise,
raise with us.
Yeah. So I'm still talking to them to see if there's still a
line of communication open. Actually, I did hear one quite cool
anecdote the other day, which is that one use for hemp that I had
never thought of is that it can be used apparently to extract contaminants
from soil.
Mm.
And yeah. And
they're exploring that. I linked them up with Ministry for the Environment a
couple of days ago to explore with aThat it might
be able to be used with our own contaminated sites in New Zealand.
So
that's the kind of thing that probably would've been too hard before the
licensing-
Mm
... regime got removed, but that's kind of the way that we understand-
Do you mean the byproduct, or do you mean the actual planting?
That the planting it can purify the soil?
Doesn't purify the soil. It's more about, it's an efficient way of
extracting it. So the roots go down quite-
Yeah
... deep and-
Oh, I see
... and they get there quite fast, and they suck up some toxins in
the soil, and then you harvest them.
And so you essentially pull the toxins out with the plants, and
then,
you burn them at a high temperature and filter out the toxins and,
you're left with a kind of byproduct that can go back into the ground.
So-
Mm
... it doesn't destroy the toxins, but it's an efficient way of extracting
them from the soil.
Right.
Yeah.
Very good. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thanks for your time.
Well, welcome to the-
Hi
... Primary Production Select Committee.
We've got
50 minutes,
so,
time's yours, fire away.
I guess
quite keen to hear your views on,
obviously, the HASNO and ACVM stuff that we've
seen
documentation through on.
Mr. Chair, Select Committee members, value and appreciate your time today
and ongoing interest in this topic.
Look, three things we thought would be useful to cover off today.
One, you requested a progress update since we last caught up with committee back
in November 2024, around the Ministry for Regulation
review and the pack that we sent through.
Mm.
Secondly, would be useful to talk about legislative changes.
Fantastic to see the ACVM and the HASNO Amendment bills, pass
first reading last week.
If interested, we could share some high-level initial member
insights, noting that the bills will need really careful
consideration, and we look forward to coming back to Select Committee.
And then thirdly, just to chat to you beyond legislative change, where are
we trying to move some solutions forward-
Thanks
... to make progress in this area that don't require legislative change.
So look, let's start with just emphasizing from the front
that basically the views we represent here today is feedback
from our members and not individuals.
With me also here is Emma Waller from an AFANZ board
perspective to speak to where the board's thinking is at on this.
So look, let's start with since we last caught up in November, we had the
Ministry for Regulation review come out. So the report came out in February.
It largely confirmed what industry had been signaling for some time.
Cabinet have backed a really positive roadmap for change, and industry
strongly support that.
For us, we would like to say that we recognize and acknowledge the
significant activity that's been underway-
Mm
... with regulators, so a lot of activity going on,
on the ground, and it's the applicant experience that we're
representing here. So what we're looking at around is the
outcomes in terms of an easier process,
seeing that red tape removed, and ultimately, are we getting the new products that
farmers, growers, and vets need. So what we have done
in November of 2025 and February of
2026 was we went out on the ground to applicants, and
we did pulse surveys. So those surveys are publicly
available, and the results really speak for themselves where we're at
with those. So we are hearing from applicants that they're
not seeing a change in the complexity of the approval process.
So for 75% of members back in
February, we did a deep dive of R&D companies, so that's both
domestic New Zealand and also overseas global
registrants. And ultimately, 75% of them
were saying that compared to other markets, New Zealand is a less attractive place
to do business.
So there's, as of May, we do note
that there is some positive announcements around some of the newer product
types and the new label approvals happening, but for our
members, they are looking for a steady stream of them rather than a slow
trickle. So ultimately, what they are looking for in terms of
outcomes is an actual process that's having less
red tape, and it's looking like it is getting easier.
They're seeing a stream of the new product and the new label uses come through,
and that industry feedback has been incorporated into some of the
operational solutions that have been put on the table to try to support.
So,
ultimately, we'll do another pulse member survey again soon,
and we do appreciate that some of this messaging can be at times hard to hear,
but ultimately, it reflects the experience that our members are having on the
ground. Members of this Select Committee have also heard
directly from R&D companies recently as to where
their applications are at currently, and we are supporting applicants
with case examples into ministers currently as well, to give you some
context.
So look, the other update is what have been the industry impacts for
our members since we last caught up.
So we've had things like Bayer have exited R&D in Hastings
after 64 years. Back in 2018, they were getting
world-first registrations in this country right here.
We're hearing about a decline in the demand for critical
laboratory capability to ensure that R&D data can be used
offshore, so internationally used.Companion
animal. We're dealing with a case study at the moment where a very
simple
label difference between Australia and New Zealand,
240% more to the manufacturer to bring it to New Zealand.
So again, you've heard many of these case examples
individually as well as you've been out and traveled through with
members. So for us, the real opportunity here is
around how do we actually see that progress in terms of
those three things that these companies are looking for.
And for many of them, they're asking the question now since we've met,
is it's no longer do we register here, it's do we supply at all?
So that's actually critical, and that's across the board, both in terms of
chemistry, biologicals, the organic stuff, as well as the
synthetic. So that's the choice we've got in front of us now as
a country, but it's the real opportunity with the legislation as
well. So really high level, if I could share some
perspectives on the legislation.
Again, we'd like to acknowledge Minister Seymour, Hoggard, and Griggs for
progressing the bills, and also the work of the officials and the
regulators to get it where it is at.
Cabinet's intent has been really clear on this, a
proportionate, timely, transparent, and efficient regulatory
approvals process.
So our feedback today is preliminary.
There have been a heap of learnings out of the RMA and the medicines
reforms as well. So today what we're providing is very
high-level member feedback. We really look forward to coming to select
committee on this, and we will put a really thorough submission through.
So look, industry's practical and lived experience is going to be
important here too also.
Our analysis looked at three really clear things to date.
Do these bills deliver on Cabinet's intent?
Did they listen and incorporate industry and community
feedback from the initial round of proposals?
And really importantly, do they set robust principles and
time frames that's actually going to enable
transparency, consistency, and
also that accountability? So I think if we
could summarize overall, the early analysis from members is there's still a
bit of a way to go in terms of are these bills going to deliver to Cabinet's
intent. If we look at HSNO, there is some positive
stuff in there around data protection.
But ultimately, there's also a levy in there where there's some important detail
missing around principle setting, and industry are
strongly against a levy unless outcomes can be
demonstrated for the investment to date.
Everyone supports a properly funded regulator, but
ultimately, it's that pace around outcomes for investment.
For ACVM, there's been much discussed about recognizing
trusted overseas regulators. A runway appears to be there,
but will it deliver in practice is yet to be seen.
There is already some red flags popping up around
decision-making powers, criteria, the level of
thresholds required, and the off-ramp.
So we will come back with more detail on that as we work through it
carefully.
But for Botox, one of the things that has really stood out is around time
frames. And why do I talk about that, and why does that matter?
When we listened to the bills being read in the first reading, we heard
the concerns around consistent, equal,
fair assessment for all products.
Our members support that, but that starts with sunlight, and that
actually starts with transparent time frames from when an applicant actually
puts the application in to when it's actually decided.
So members of this committee have heard from global R&D companies
case examples of where new, innovative, more modern chemistry has
sat effectively for years, technically
within statute, but effectively it's not making progress through
the queue. So that's an opportunity there.
So is loosening those time frames up actually going to enable
you to identify, measure, and fix if there
is any unequal treatment happening there?
So time frames are something that will be a theme when we come back and
speak to you.
Really quickly and finally, one of the other thoughts that has popped up across
members as they've looked and listened across the bills,
the precautionary principle.
So this one, this was born and
originated out of the EU, okay. But in the last three decades, it
has had significant refinement around how it's interpreted.
There's been elements of definition ambiguity, neutrality, and
other elements that they are refining that as they go.
The question we're left with is has New Zealand had that conversation yet?
So it's not saying the question we want to leave select committee with is
not is the precautionary principle wrong as it stands.
What we're asking is a more modest and probably a more important
question, did it deserve the right to a public consultation and
actually to have a debate and the opportunity to update it given what's happening
in the EU?
With that, I think the final comments we do have is we remain
really committed to back this reform.
We absolutely acknowledge the efforts and the activities of the regulators,
and we are working hard around operational updates separate to the
legislation that we think offer opportunity to streamline and to
help manage low risks in a safer way to actually
take resource off regulators. But with me
today, I've had Emma Waller, who's one of our board members.
She also works closely across the Australia-New Zealand system.
So I thought I'd pass to Emma to share some perspectives.
So the AFANZ board is strongly behind
AFANZ as our wider sector stakeholders such as Business New Zealand,
Horticulture New Zealand, and NZVA, who have all signaled
strong supportIn their manifestos,
a proportionate, transparent, and efficient, and
certain approval regulatory process is critical for all companies
that want to innovate in New Zealand.
Certainty really matters. For many companies, it's
become impossible to make supply chain decisions and plan
for seasonal markets given the uncertainty of where the pipeline
products are in the regulatory system and when they'll come through.
From a personal perspective, I work across both Australian and New Zealand
regulators, so I've seen firsthand the differences in our
systems. In Australia, you can submit for a novel active
ingredient and reasonably confidently expect to get
approval in two years or less. In New Zealand,
we have a completely different experience where your applications for
the same novel active ingredient will go into the regulator's
pipeline, or queue, and sit there for five
years, sometimes more. So it's very disheartening from a New Zealand
perspective to see the same active ingredients get to the
market
at least three years earlier in Australia.
It would be really good to see an action plan on the memorandum of understanding,
which was signed in November between our two regulators, and see what that will
deliver and when.
So what does success look like? These delays
impact all products, be it synthetic, organic,
or new biologicals.
What our members want to see is, like Liz said, a
steady stream of approvals coming through, not the slow trickle that we've been
experiencing for the last five or so years.
A better application process and processing times through
streamlined and efficient processes with no unnecessary
duplication and red tape, which we're currently faced with.
We want to see red tape easing,
with the opportunity to adopt solutions, such as
self-assessable changes, containment approvals, sorry,
group standards.
These are
solutions which were proposed in the review, which don't need
legislative change, so they can be quick and easy ones.
The sector backs reform, but what matters most
now is the throughput. It's no longer just a regulatory
issue, it's an investment decision being made offshore.
When 75% of our member
companies say New Zealand is becoming less attractive for innovation, the
risk isn't delay, but the risk is New Zealand missing out.
Thank you. We've got a couple of questions. Yes, Suz.
Thank you very much. Liz, you
talked about concern regarding, in terms of HASNO, you talked about
concerns regarding principle setting.
I just wondered what you meant by that.
Precautionary.
Huh?
Precautionary principle.
Oh, okay.
And also to clarify,
we note that they're putting in a new levy, so given the
learnings we've had around wider regulation, there'll be some constructive
thoughts we'll have around how do you make sure that you have some really
strong principles setting around that, and it's specific to the levy as well.
Oh, I see.
Yeah. I think the question we had around precautionary
principle was more why was it not within the scope of actually
having some public consultation, given it's been updated as well in other
jurisdictions as well. And so did we miss an opportunity, I
guess, was the question.
But the principle setting is around some thoughts we'll be bringing
around that relative to the levy. Yeah.
Okay. Awesome.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Steve.
And just for clarification, you're not against
the idea of a risk tier framework, it's just about
transparency and
logic-
Precaution
... around where things fit in
those tiers-
This is the-
... so that
there's an appropriate
level of application of precaution to things that are greater
risk, but there's a potential to
process things more quickly that are of lower risk.
This is-
And is there a lack of clarity on where things
fit when they turn up and apply for release, where products
sit into the process?
If we look to what the Ministry for Regulation review found, it found
that we do have a really good risk assessment system.
So that's important, and that actually matters.
We're all supportive of that. I think the question was, it
identified that at times it's not getting that balance and enabling actually the
access to the new innovation.
Mm-hmm.
Now, why does that matter? Because most of the stuff that we're actually trying to
bring in is more modern or is replacing older
chemistry. So in terms of an appropriate
risk and safeguards, that's in everybody's interest, and I think the good
news is the report identified that we've got that.
But it's about how do we achieve the right risk balance.
That's really the question. So it's actually if we put the safeguards to one
side, what we're hearing from members on the ground
is that at the moment it's that pace around
can they have certainty and proportionality of the pipeline when they put
a new active ingredient in to actually be approved.
So that's where time frames come in, because certainty really matters,
and it's about how do you strike that balance.
Can I just supplement?
Yeah.
So when a product application comes in,
does it immediately go into a queue to be
assessed linearly depending on which came in first, a first in
first served? Or is there some sort of preliminary
tiering of the risk at the outset so that-
A new product gets set,
because of its characteristics or because of overseas
approvals, it can be placed in a lower risk tier or a medium
risk tier or a higher risk tier based on what the characteristics, inherent
characteristics are of that product. Is that how it works?
Yeah. So typically it is going in on a first, it's literally
put in and it's kind of in the queue with everything else.
I mean, Emma-
Right. But how do they do it more efficiently overseas is, I guess, what I'm trying
to understand.
Yeah. So this is about are there, it's a resource focus on
what are the risks that matter most.
So at an operational level, for example, some of the things we are trying to bring
in at the moment is overseas there are lower risk changes.
Things like where there isn't a unique to New Zealand trade or environmental
risk. Is there opportunities then for applicants to
self-assess lower risk changes?
Emma, as someone who puts applications in all the time,
do you want to comment on that in terms of where you see the
opportunities around assessment of risk and where they're
focusing?
Yeah, there's definitely opportunities to triage that queue.
Right.
In your example of
lower risk applications,
there are applications that go in where they've been assessed by overseas
regulators, and they could be triaged into another category, for
sure. And utilizing an
assessment that's been done by a trusted regulator is definitely
an opportunity that should be explored.
I'm surprised that that's not happened.
Right, we've come to time. Thank you very much,
Liz and Emma. I expect that we'll see you again through
the submission process.
So thank you very much for your time today.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you.